feat(launchpad): add config instructions for monitoring HA (#89)
graphops/docs: docs/launchpad/guides/monitoring-stack-with-HA.md

---
---
# Deploying a Monitoring stack with HA

## Prerequisites
- A fully functional working Kubernetes cluster

> - Two object storage buckets: one for Logs data, with Loki, and one for Metrics data, with Thanos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two object storage buckets: one for Logs data, used by Loki, and one for Metrics data, used by Thanos
```

## Configuring Loki for HA

Launchpad uses the [loki-distributed](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/loki-distributed) release for setting up Loki, which can be configured according to its values interface (as seen [here](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/loki-distributed/values.yaml))

*Note*: The example setups we'll show will be based on an architecture that makes use of the following components: querier, distributor, ingester, queryFrontend, gateway, compactor, ruler, indexGateway. Different architectures are possible so adjust to your needs as necessary.

> For an HA one thing that we will need to do is setup the several components with multiple replicas each, and loki-distributed values can be set for that purpose like in the following example snippet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an HA setup, deploying several components with multiple replicas each, and loki-distributed values can be set like in the following example snippet:
```

```yaml
querier:
  replicas: 2
  maxUnavailable: 1
distributor:
  replicas: 3
  maxUnavailable: 2
ingester:
  replicas: 3
  maxUnavailable: 2
queryFrontend:
  replicas: 2
  maxUnavailable: 1
gateway:
  replicas: 2
  maxUnavailable: 1
compactor:
  kind: Deployment
  replicas: 1
  enabled: true
ruler:
  enabled: true
  replicas: 2
  maxUnavailable: 1
indexGateway:
  enabled: true
  replicas: 2
  maxUnavailable: 1
loki:
  structuredConfig:
    ruler:
      ring:
        kvstore:
          store: memberlist
    ingester:
      lifecycler:
        ring:
          replication_factor: 2
```

> *Warning*: If you use a compactor there should only be at most one instance of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Warning*: If you use a compactor there should only be at most one instance of it to avoid conflicts or redundant work when deduplicating and compacting logs
```

Besides increasing the number of replicas, ingester `replication_factor` is of particular relevance as the Distributor will distribute the write load to multiple ingesters and will require a quorum of them to have acknowledged the write (replication_factor / 2 + 1). For lowering the chances of loosing logs, a replication_factor of at least two should be used (Loki default is 3).

> For storage, Loki only really supports object storage and that is then a hard requirement (note, this holds even if you don't intend to use HA and don't have more than one replica for any component, as it's still the case the storage must be shared by multiple components).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loki's storage fundamentally requires object storage, regardless of whether HA is used or if there's more than one replica for any component, as multiple components need to share this storage.
```

          key: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
ingester:
  extraArgs:
    - -config.expand-env=true
  extraEnv:
    - name: S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: <<bucket-secret>>
          key: S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    - name: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: <<bucket-secret>>
          key: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
compactor:
  extraArgs:
    - -config.expand-env=true
  extraEnv:
    - name: S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: <<bucket-secret>>
          key: S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    - name: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: <<bucket-secret>>
          key: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
```

Here we are setting up object storage in the `structuredConfig` section, but to keep the credentials secret, we are adding env vars from secrets to several components and an extra command line argument `-config.expand-env=true`, the purpose of which is being able to use ENV vars in the `structuredConfig` section. With that argument, the components will replace the values such as `${S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID}` by the corresponding ENV var value upon processing the config.

> Besides setting up object storage, we're also configuring TSDB index schema in substitution of the default boltdb-shipper, which is a more recent and more efficient alternative to it. Doing so is not mandatory but recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Besides setting up object storage, we're also configuring TSDB index schema in substitution of the default boltdb-shipper, which is a more recent and more efficient alternative to it. Doing so is not mandatory but recommended.
```

                  secretKeyRef:
                    name: <<bucket-secret>>
                    key: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
          queryFrontend:
            replicas: 2
            maxUnavailable: 1
          gateway:
            replicas: 2
            maxUnavailable: 1
          compactor:
            kind: Deployment
            replicas: 1
            enabled: true
            extraArgs:
              - -config.expand-env=true
            extraEnv:
              - name: S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID
                valueFrom:
                  secretKeyRef:
                    name: <<bucket-secret>>
                    key: S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID
              - name: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
                valueFrom:
                  secretKeyRef:
                    name: <<bucket-secret>>
                    key: S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
          ruler:
            enabled: true
            replicas: 2
            maxUnavailable: 1
          indexGateway:
            enabled: true
            replicas: 2
            maxUnavailable: 1
          serviceMonitor:
            enabled: true
          prometheusRule:
            enabled: true
            namespace: monitoring
```

> We've also added setting up ruler with alertmanager's endpoint (which can be deployed by the Monitoring Namespace as well, as will be seen in the Metrics section).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've also added setting up Ruler with Alertmanager's endpoint (which can be deployed by the Monitoring Namespace as well, as will be seen in the Metrics section).
```

```yaml
repositories:
- name: bitnami
  url: https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
          
releases:
  - name: thanos
    namespace: monitoring
    createNamespace: true
    chart: bitnami/thanos
    version: ~12.20
    missingFileHandler: Warn
    values:
    - existingObjstoreSecret: <<thanos-objstore-secret>>
      query:
        replicaCount: 2
        dnsDiscovery:
          sidecarsService: "prometheus-operated"
          sidecarsNamespace: "monitoring"
        replicaLabel:
          - prometheus_replica
      queryFrontend:
        enabled: true
        replicaCount: 2
      compactor:
        enabled: true
        persistence:
          enabled: true
        retentionResolutionRaw: 30d
        retentionResolution5m: 30d
        retentionResolution1h: 10y
      storegateway:
        enabled: true
        replicaCount: 2
        persistence:
          enabled: true
      metrics:
        enabled: true
        serviceMonitor:
          enabled: true
      prometheusRule:
        enabled: true
```

> where we added the bitnami repository, and a release to deploy the thanos chart from that repository. From the values used in this example, notice the `query.dnsDiscovery` and `query.replicaLabel` keys, as those values need to match the ones used in thanos prometheus sidecar, deployed in the `kube-prometheus-stack` release with the Monitoring Namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where we added the bitnami repository, and a release to deploy the Thanos chart from that repository. From the values used in this example, notice the `query.dnsDiscovery` and `query.replicaLabel` keys, as those values need to match the ones used in Thanos Prometheus sidecar, deployed in the `kube-prometheus-stack` release with the Monitoring Namespace.
```

                  - host    all             all                ::1/128            md5
                  - local   replication     standby                    trust
                  - hostssl replication     standby all                md5
                  - hostnossl all           all                all                md5
                  - hostssl all             +zalandos    all                pam
                  - hostssl all             all                all                md5
              podAnnotations:
                coa.zalan.do/auto-create-database: "true"
```

Having that database, adjusting grafana values setup can be achieved like so:

```yaml
grafana:
  replicas: 2
  envValueFrom:
    DATABASE_PASSWORD:
      secretKeyRef:
        name: grafana.grafana-database.credentials.postgresql.acid.zalan.do
        key: password
  sidecar:
    datasources:
      url: http://thanos-query-frontend:9090
      createPrometheusReplicasDatasources: false
  grafana.ini:
    database:
      type: postgres
      host: grafana-database.monitoring.svc:5432
      name: grafana
      user: grafana
      password: "$__env{DATABASE_PASSWORD}"
```

> Finally, we need to adjust prometheus to increase replicas and use thanos sidecar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to adjust Prometheus to increase replicas and use Thanos sidecar.

```
